# RASP from scratch

This repo provides Dockerfiles that help in the creation of a production-ready container image for running RASP forecasts.
Contrary to most other available setups, WRF is built from scratch.

## Build

The building process is somewhat complicated as we want to keep the final image size as small as possible.
Therefore, the build happens in 3 separate stages that result in intermediate images.
`docker-compose` should be used for the build, because it lets you configure certain variables in a `.env` file (copy or rename the provided template and adapt the documented variables to your needs).

### Build base image

```shell
$ docker-compose build base
```

This image will be used in the next steps.
It is based on Fedora Linux and adds common utilities and libraries.

### Build WRF

**`wrf/configure.wrf.patch` applies optimization options regarding the CPU architecture. Make sure that both your build machine as well as your production server support the given architectures!**
If you will run RASP on the same machine that you use for this build, you can leave `-march=native -mtune=native`.
Otherwise, set those flags accordingly (or remove them).

You might run into problems in the next step if you specify an instruction set that is not available your current building machine!
`geogrid.exe` will possibly crash with an `Illegal Instruction` error.

```shell
$ docker-compose build wrf
```

The version of WRF and WPS you have specified in `.env` are fetched from GitHub and compiled from source.
This can take a long time, so be patient and do not worry about the verbose output!
Note that the provided patches might not work for arbitrary versions of WRF and WPS.

WRF will be compiled with GNU compilers in smpar (i.e. OpenMP) mode (compilation option 33) and with basic nesting support (nesting option 1).

We use the bare minimum of DrJack's patches to change WRF's registry, so that certain variables which are needed for the RASP plot routines appear in `wrfout` files.
Note however, that DrJack's cloud calculation patches are not applied and thus, `wrf=CFRAC[L|M|H]` are not available (or wrong)!
Use `cfrac[l|m|h]` instead, since those are implemented in the current version of NCL.

### Build RASP

**You will need geographical data in `rasp/geog.tar.gz` before you run this step!**
Go to [UCAR's page](https://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/download/get_sources_wps_geog.html) and download the appropriate bundle.

```shell
$ docker-compose build rasp
```

This sets up the directory structure for RASP runs with all necessary binaries and run tables from the WRF image as well as the RASP plotting environment.
Copying the geographical data into the container and unzipping it will take a long time, so please be patient again.
The region you have specified in `.env` is automatically initialized by running `geogrid.exe`.

Finally, in a second build stage, only the necessary artifacts are copied over from the first stage so that the final image remains at an optimal size.

### Adapt to your own region

You can easily provide your own region by providing a region folder similar to `TIR` (which is the region I use) and rerunning the previous `docker build` command with `--build-arg region=<your region folder>`.
Remember to also change some region specific aspects of the NCL scripts located in `rasp/GM`.

You need the following data in your region folder:
 - `namelist.wps` for WPS which is used to set up the domain once and pre-process meteorological data before every run
 - `namelist.input` for WRF with all run-specific settings considering numerics, physics options,...
 - A symlink named `Vtable` to the Variable Table filename you want to use for your GRIB files. For example, if you force your WRF run with GFS data, do `ln -s Vtable.GFS Vtable`. The actual table file does not have to exist on your host machine, it will be provided by the WRF image for common data sources.

If you use non-stock geog data (e.g. SRTM):
 - Your custom `GEOGRID.TBL`

Note that you can provide any custom tables that WRF/WPS recognizes in your region directory yourself; the respective stock version will then be overwritten.

## Run 

```shell
$ docker-compose run rasp
```

`run -d` makes this a background process.

If you want an interactive shell to your container (e.g. for testing), append `/bin/bash`.
Then, inside the container, execute the entry script `bin/runRasp.sh <region>` to start the RASP run for your `<region>` manually.
To leave the container without stopping the RASP run, type `Ctrl+P Ctrl+Q`.

## View the results

The results of your RASP run should be in `../results/OUT` if everything went well.
Logs are available in `../results/LOG`.

Check out [aufwin.de](https://aufwin.de/forecast), a web app for viewing data generated by RASP.
You can get the source from [this repository](https://github.com/sfalmo/aufwin.de) and configure site-specific settings to your needs.
